************
Introduction
************

The usefulness of computers is partly a result of their versatility in
solving various problems and performing tasks. To be able to take
advantage of the speed and power of computers, one needs to know how
to program. This module is about computer programming and how it can
be used to solve problems or perform useful tasks.

Our language of choice is Python -- a recent language which has been
found to be powerful, relatively easy to learn, and able to provide a
platform to advanced programming. In this module you will learn how to
analyse a problem and develop an effective solution for it using the
Python programming language.


What is a computer?
===================

A computer is a general-purpose device which behaves according to the
sets of instructions and data with which it is provided.  Computers
execute instructions to process data.  Each computer has at its core a
central processing unit (CPU) -- modern CPUs are built as a single
microprocessor chip.

Types of computers
==================

History of computers
====================

Programming a computer
======================

Programming languages
=====================


Summary
=======

A computer is simply a machine that follows a list of instructions -
also known as programs. At the lowest-level, each instruction is
simple eg. adding two numbers.

A computer consists of four major parts - input devices, CPU, memory
and output devices. The computer can be regarded as an information
processing machine, taking in information from input devices,
processing it with the CPU and then displaying the result on an output
device. While processing, the computer can save the information for
later use in the memory.

There are two kinds of memory - primary and secondary memory. Primary
memory is closely linked to the CPU and is volatile. It is much faster
than secondary memory but this comes at a price. Secondary memory is
separate from the CPU and does not lose its content when the computer
is switched off. Primary memory also stores contents in addressable
cells that can each hold a single value, in contrast to secondary
memory, which stores information in files.

At the lowest level, computers understand machine language with
assembly language one level up. Each assembler instruction corresponds
to a machine instruction, but it allows humans to easily read it. An
assembler is needed to translate assembly language into machine
language.

High-level languages were developed to make it easier for human to
read and understand. A compiler is needed to convert programs written
in these languages to machine language. High-level languages can be
grouped into four types. Procedural languages include BASIC, C, COBOL,
FORTRAN and Pascal. An example of a functional language is Lisp, while
Prolog is a common logic language. C++ is a hybrid language - a
combination of procedural and object-oriented , while Java and
Smalltalk are object-oriented languages.

Computer systems can be grouped into four types. A single-user
personal computer is one that can be used by a single user at a
time. Many people can share the use of a computer via terminals in a
time-share system. A batch computer is very efficient but not
interactive. A network is a group of linked computers.

Computers have evolved exponentially over time - from expensive large
room-sized machine to today's affordable and compact units.
